NPM vs NPX (#1131)
section-io/engineering-education: articles/npm-vs-npx-what-is-the-difference/index.md

NPX comes in to solve a couple of keystrokes to make it easier to execute Node.js modules. It makes it easier to run and interact with executables hosted in the NPM registry. It makes it easier to executed NPM local binaries. It comes with many added features.

### Using NPX

With NPX, you can run and executes packages without having to install them locally or globally.

When running NPM executables with NPX, if a package is installed, NPX will search for the package binaries (either local or global) and then run the package.

If the package is not installed, NPX will download and cache the package directly from the NPM registry without locally saving the package binaries. It will execute the package binaries without installing the packages in your system, as you would typically do with NPM.

Let's check some key use cases of NPX.

Run the following command to make sure you have NPX installed using `which npx`.

If not installed, use `npm install -g NPM@latest` to update NPM to the higher version above 5.2 or later, and you will have the NPX CLI tool available. You can also install NPX as a stand-alone package. Run `npm i npx` to install the NPX runner.

#### NPX standard command

> With NPX, you just need this NPX command to execute the package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To execute a package with NPX, run:
```

```bash
npx your-package
```

> Type `npx --help` to get a more detailed npx commands syntax.
> 
> ```bash
>   npx [options] <command>[@version] [command-arg]...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type `npx --help` to get a more detailed npx commands syntax.

Output: 
```bash
  npx [options] <command>[@version] [command-arg]...
```

  npx [options] [-p|--package <package>]... <command> [command-arg]...

  npx [options] -c '<command-string>'
```

#### Executing installed packages

> When using NPM, you had to remember and type the package path to the command, as explained in the Eslint case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using NPM, you had to remember and type the path of the package in the command, as explained in the Eslint case.
```

```bash
./node_modules/.bin/eslint yourfile.js
```

> This is tiresome to always add the node modules path, referencing them all over your files and commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is tiresome to always add the node modules path, referencing them all over your files and commands.
```

With NPX, you can have your local packages installed and use NPX commands (instead of adding the whole path) to execute the package binaries.

```bash
npx eslint yourfile.js
```

NPX will execute packages without having to install them. It will create a temporary cache and then remove it when the execution is complete. This saves on disk size and allows you to run a package only when it's needed. It also gives you the advantage of testing packages without having to install them.

NPX lets you execute local 'node modules' as if they were global. If the package was not previously installed, NPX would not install the package in your system; instead, it will create a temporary cache that will hold the package binaries. Once the execution is over, NPX will remove the installed cache binaries from the system. This way, your globals stays clean.

> 

Reviewer: Some points are very repetitive, as the temporary cache without installing. Make sure you don't repeat points.

This concept is commonly seen when executing NPM scripts. For example, let's say you are using the [Sequelize](https://sequelize.org/) package to automate data migration and seed data from your project. For that case, you will need the [Sequelize CLI](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize-cli). You will need to know where Sequelize is installed in your project in order to execute the package binaries. For example

```bash
node_modules/.bin/sequelize
```

Using NPM is pretty easy, as you just need to edit the `package.json` script and add the package path.

```bash
"scripts": {
    "db:migrate" 'node_modules/.bin/sequelize db:migrate'
},
```

To seed the database, execute the script by running

```bash

> npx run db:migrate

Reviewer: I think you mean `npm`

```

This is not that hard.

However, when you use NPX, things get very much simpler.

> Running
> 
> ```bash
> npx sequelize db:seed
> ```
> 
> Will be enough to seed the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the below command will be enough to seed the database.

```bash
npx sequelize db:seed
```
```

Using NPX, you will only run the command once without installing the package.

```bash
npx create-react-app my-sample-app
```

With NPX, one-off commands such as this are a lot more simple and straightforward. You need to run an NPX command once, and the app is created under the directory where the command line point. And when you need to create another React app, you just run the NPX command repeatedly without installing the package on your local computer. You don't need to worry about the package updates, as NPX will always fetch the latest version available in the NPM registry.

When you execute the NPX command within your project context directory, NPM will execute your project without the package being installed globally. With such approaches, you avoid clogging up your globals with packages that you use once in a blue moon.

#### NPX versioning

When it comes to packages versioning, NPX will handle that perfectly with its `package-lock.json` file. With NPX, there are a lot more features that you can benefit from package versioning, such as

- Executing a specific package version.

> If you want to execute a specific package's version, let's say, Eslint, you don't have to install that package version in your system. All you need is to specify the package version, as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to execute a specific package's version, let's say, Eslint, you should specify the package version, as shown below.
```

```bash
npx eslint@3.9.0 --version
```

Your project will be executed with the package version you have specified.

- Version testing.

With NPM, if you want to test packages, you have to download the packages and run them inside your project. This comes in handy when upgrading packages to newer versions. With NPX, you can check out the new version before deciding whether to update them to determine if the new version is compatible with your project.

NPX plays a great role in testing new package versions with your project before integrating them into your project. You can check out the latest version before you decide whether to upgrade your project or not.

> For example, let's take a Node.js project, for instance, where [Webpack](https://www.npmjs.com/package/webpack) installed globally, and it's currently installed version is 4.40.3. Weback is used for bundling project assets. Check out this [guide](/engineering-education/webpack/) to learn more about configuring Webpack with your project. When configured, run `webpack` to get the command results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's take a Node.js project, for instance where [Webpack](https://www.npmjs.com/package/webpack) is installed globally, and the currently installed version is 4.40.3. Webpack is used for bundling project assets. Check out this [guide](/engineering-education/webpack/) to learn more about configuring Webpack with your project. When configured, run `webpack` to get the command results.
```

```bash
Hash: b41ed73s02F90S74F9b
Version: webpack 4.40.3
Time: 394ms
        Asset     Size  Chunks             Chunk Names
    build/main.js   7.32 kB       0  [emitted]  main
   [0] ./index.js 4.02 kB {0} [built]
```

Let's try using NPX and run webpack at version 5.11.1 to see what the difference would look like on the project. Run `npx webpack@5.11.1`.

```bash
Hash: b41ed73s02F90S74F9b
Version: webpack 5.11.1
Time: 379ms
        Asset     Size  Chunks             Chunk Names
    build/main.js   5.62 kB       0  [emitted]  main
   [0] ./index.js 4.02 kB {0} [built]
```

Here, the results show that the new version will help you buddle your project further with a couple of KBs.

- NPX with NVM

> [NVM](https://dev.to/ms314006/how-to-install-NPM-through-nvm-node-version-manager-5gif) stands for node version management. It helps you to install different Node.js versions is your computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NVM](https://dev.to/ms314006/how-to-install-NPM-through-nvm-node-version-manager-5gif) stands for Node Version Management. It helps you to install different Node.js versions is your computer.
```

> Moving a Node.js installation from one version to another using [NVM](https://dev.to/ms314006/how-to-install-NPM-through-nvm-node-version-manager-5gif) can a little bit tricky. NPX helps you to use specific Node.js versions without using NVM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving a Node.js installation from one version to another using [NVM](https://dev.to/ms314006/how-to-install-NPM-through-nvm-node-version-manager-5gif) can be a little bit tricky. NPX helps you to use specific Node.js versions without using NVM.
```

For example

```bash
npx -p node@12.18.3 -- node index.js
```

You can use the version to run your .js files.

```bash
npx -p node-@v12.18.3
```

It would become useful when checking the different new features added in Node.js versions.

#### Execute Code from URL such as gist

> NPX will download and run the code directly from the gist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NPX will download and run the code directly from a gist.
```

> Here is a simple example of running a gist code. The gist has the main js and `package.json` files.  Let's see the NPX output. Check the code from the [Github gist](https://gist.github.com/kimkimani/116e1e9d898169662fbaf6973bdbc3f5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a simple example of running a gist code. The gist has the `main.js` and `package.json` files.  Let's see the NPX output. Check the code from the [Github gist](https://gist.github.com/kimkimani/116e1e9d898169662fbaf6973bdbc3f5).
```

| For NPM to use a package, it has to be specified in the `package.json` under the script fold or available in the package's executable path. | No much hustle with editing the package.json script or remembering the package path. NPX executes packages directly from the NPM registry if not available on your local machine. |
| Due to package versioning of the NPM `package-lock.json` file, you must update the package to the latest version to use the latest updated package version. | You don't have to update and installed the package to take advantage of new update features or bug fixes. NPX will always execute the latest available version in the NPM registry. And if you need to run a specific package version, you specify the version in the NPX command, and NPX will handle the versioning for you. |

> I hope this guide helps you understand the differences between NPM and NPX and understand some major use cases of NPX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope this guide helped you understand the differences between NPM and NPX and understand some major use cases of NPX.
```
